Israel is reportedly using artificial
intelligence in its war on Gaza the
technology is being employed to select
and expand potential targets but with
more than 15,000 Palestinians killed so
far what are the implications for
civilians in Gaza this is Inside
Story
hello there and a warm welcome to the
program I'm Jonah Hall Israel's war has
devastated much of Gaza the few days of
Karm under a ceasefire with Hamas of all
but disappeared now with Israel resuming
its air strikes and shelling Israeli
Prime Minister Benyamin Netanyahu has
repeatedly warned that he wants to
eliminate Hamas and now its armies
reportedly using new AI technology to
help it EXP expand the potential list of
targets which many fear could lead to
even more civilian deaths so let's take
a closer look at this Advanced Warfare
it's being powered by large amounts of
data that's fed into an artificial
intelligence system an AI called habur
translated from Hebrew to mean the
gospel produces potential targets for
Israeli air strikes which are then
confirmed by members of an intelligence
unit the system allows Israel to
identify much L A much larger number of
targets at the same time the scope of
the bombing campaign has been broadened
even low ranking Hamas Fighters are
considered potential targets for an air
strike Israel has also loosened its
Rules of Engagement to allow for more
civilian deaths in the pursuit of its
objectives there have been reports of
family homes being bombed with the aim
of killing a single Hamas fighter more
than 15,000 Palestinians have been
killed in Israel's war on Gaza we've all
seen video showing entire neighborhoods
destroyed by the bombing Cutting Edge
technology is supposed to make Warf
Warfare more precise but the evidence on
the ground suggests the opposite may be
true in
Gaza well let's bring in our guests in
Tel Aviv meon Rapaport editor of local
call a Hebrew language news site
advancing citizen journalism and an
independent media in Durham in the UK
Robert gu pinfold lecturer in peace and
security at Durham University who
specializes in military occupation and
exit dilemas and researches Israeli
foreign and security policy and in utre
in the Netherlands Jessica dorsy
International lawyer with expertise in
international humanitarian and human
rights law she also leads the realities
of algorithmic warfare project at utr
University a warm welcome to each of you
Marin Rapaport I'd like to start with
you your outlet local call and did the
investigative reporting uh that revealed
details about this system absor the
gospel as it as it's as it's known in
English uh in a piece of work titled the
assassination factory set the scene for
us what is this system how does it
work uh the system uh um it is uh um it
is based on AI uh it is uh it is
collecting um all kind of information in
order to what uh the Army itself calls a
factory for uh producing uh uh targets
the ex Chief of Staff a kavi when he
left his office about a year ago he said
that prior we would have uh uh produced
50 targets a year now we can uh produce
targets a day it seems that in this war
the pace is even higher uh exactly how
uh does these these targets are produced
of course we don't know exactly and it's
not clear even if the intelligence
itself uh intelligence people themselves
know exactly they do know you know how
that these are being produced by AI
uh they in order to to execute an attack
of course there's a human uh uh decision
in order to push the butn it's not
pushed by itself let's not be let's be
clear about we'll get to that it's it's
it's a relative innovation in Israeli
Warfare it's not the first time it's
been deployed uh it was first spoken
about back in 2021 the 11 days of war in
2021 when Israel boasted then about
fighting its first AA AI War using
machine learning and advanced Computing
now though presumably more
advanced yes it's more advanced and I
think what is really relevant is of
course the adapter you know that there
is this uh producing of Targets in an AI
way artificial intelligence way the most
uh incriminating or maybe worrying
uh element in our uh investigation is
that uh in every for every Target
there's a file and in this file it's
written how many civilians should are in
this target so uh what it appears that
the Army knows exactly how many
civilians are living in such and such
apartment that is being targeted for an
attack uh so the outcome of killing
civilians is practically known in
advance uh so this is what makes this
use of AI really really worrisome yes
and sinister let me bring in Jessica
dorsy there we got a bit of perspective
uh from Marin 50 targets a year the Army
used to be able to generate now it's 100
a day with this new AI technology which
allows them presumably to get close to
the 15,000 targets that they've hit in
just 35 days of War that's according to
the Israeli Army itself and by
comparison in 2014 51 days of War then
they hit something like five or 6,000
targets all of which accounts for the
extremely high civilian death toll
shockingly high for this period of
conflict yeah I think um what that piece
Illustrated were three extremely
concerning uh aspects obviously the um
the the the the use of AI to generate at
such speed uh these kinds of targets
were still not all the details aren't
quite known yet but certainly to push
back on that Narrative of precision in
Warfare we're seeing entire city blocks
flattened Precision is not on the order
here um another issue highlighted in the
reporting from 972 is the non-military
targets the power targets um allegations
that those were chosen to intend to
create a shock for the civilian
population these are very concerning and
in legal terms thinking along the lines
of in possibilities to um try to
terrorize a population these kinds of
things look another really worrying
aspect is that the loosening of the
civilian casualty constraints so
essentially in a proportionality
assessment under International
humanitarian law you have to think about
your direct military Advantage versus
the kinds of Civilian harms that you can
expect and when you loosen those
constraints that used to be something
like permitting perhaps dozens of
Civilian casualties to now hundreds this
is a recipe for disaster that's being
borne by the brunt of it is being borne
by the civilians on the ground in these
densely populated areas like Gaza it's
very concerning um and and from an
international legal perspective I think
we have to be very very um uh well we
need to push back as an International
Community on the proportionality
questions as well as distinction about
what kinds of targets are being um uh
exploded in these situations um if
they're non-military Targets this is
directly contrary to international law
well let me put this to Rob gist pinfold
uh reporting in the Israeli media Rob
describes the system's ability to order
Precision strikes while quote making
sure as far as possible there will be no
harm to non-involved civilians that
comes from a report in yedo arono
newspaper that's what the Israeli public
is being told and that you've only
you've only got to look around and look
at these figures and look at the
devastation to wonder whether you know
either this system isn't working or
there's been a substantial policy change
and the military's targeting is simply
indiscriminate I think it's the policy
change that's what matters here uh and
we focus on the AI but we have to look
at Israel's objectives in this war
traditionally when Israel's gone to war
or engaged in conflict with Hamas and
indeed with Hezbollah it's been a status
quo power Israel's objective has been to
basically reinforce the status quo to
project its deterrence uh to get the
other side uh to be invested in the
status quo and to disincentivize them
from trying to change things the attacks
on October the 7th meant all of that um
was basically was Israel reshuffled its
um security conception it moved from um
preserving the status quo to trying to
create a new status quo so Israel's
objective in this war it stated
objective is removing Hamas from power
or at the very least dealing a crippling
blow that would entail killing or
capturing the group's military leaders
removing it from uh a governance role in
most or all uh of the Gaza Strip for
example and dealing a lethal uh blow to
its military wing uh so that requires a
completely different um that that's a
completely different operational
question for the IDF if previously they
were looking uh to keep things the way
they are the fact that they're keeping
they now want to change things mean that
Israel's targeting parameters have been
broadened significantly um we know that
Israel traditionally operates by what's
been described as a traffic light system
they know how many civilians are in uh
these locations uh and they code them by
red yellow and green uh depending on how
many civilians are there and the high
value of the Target red obviously mean
uh meaning that they are less likely or
shouldn't attack green meaning that the
attack should be a go and because it has
different aims because uh Israel's
Society is reeling from those attacks on
October the 7th uh those um the goal
posts have shifted significantly and
Israel as you've said previously now has
significantly broader targeting
parameters many of those targets that
were previously red or yellow have now
become green because Israel has
different political objectives in this
war that is the removal of Hamas Marin
is that what you're reporting revealed
essentially that whilst this system is
able to give pretty accurate data about
the numbers of civilians in any given
targeted area that data is actually
being used to decide to attack in some
cases rather than not to
attack yes of course uh I think there is
a um uh it's true that I think the goals
of this war are different and the um the
sources that we have talked to you know
are
not um in a in a position to know
exactly what are uh the goals of the
higher military commands but it's clear
that the goals are different that the
goals are to eliminate Hamas uh uh and
we basically to reoccupy Gaza as we've
heard yesterday from prime minister
Netanyahu uh to totally reoccupy Gaza
and and control it militar uh this also
uh uh means or it meant in the first
stage in Northern Gaza uh uh driving
away uh more a million people uh to the
southern uh uh parts of the Gaza Street
uh how
what connection is there between the
loosening of uh of its uh of its rules
concerning uh civilian uh
casualties uh and uh uh and to the
effort to drive away this population of
course this is something that we don't
know you know exactly but I think uh
it's quite plausible to assume that
there is a connection a very maybe a
very close connection between these two
angs uh between these two phenomenon on
the one hand push the Palestinian South
and on the other uh make a very loose uh
attack uh civilian Target in a very
loose way uh knowing that there are
there may be uh dozens or even in one
case as reported
hundreds of Civilian casualties that
could be Hur out of one attack so uh you
know it comes together it seems that it
comes together Jessica dorsy a war then
on civilians as much as a war on Hamas
essentially would you agree with
that well that's I think the facto what
we are seeing so back to the the points
raised by the the other two panelists
the policies the Strategic aims and
goals may have changed but law Wars
still have laws and those are imperative
not only for the protection of civilians
that centering the protection of
civilians has to be it's a legal
obligation to follow that and and not
only is it a legal obligation we're
seeing even close allies the United
States uh Secretary of Defense has
pushed back on this policy change and
approach saying that Israel risks a
strategic defeat if they do not protect
civilian
so it's legal it's strategic it's in the
interest of everyone to uh be much less
uh loose let's say with respect to the
targeting parameters it's all very it's
all very well to say that much as as
politicians in Washington can say that
is Israel and the government of Mr
Netanyahu are apparently blindly blindly
ignoring uh all of that there's not very
much anybody can do about
it well it seems in the short term that
may be unfortunately the case but I do
think uh in the longer term certainly
there are investigations ongoing with
respect to uh international criminal law
at the moment the prosecutor of the
international criminal court has opened
up investigations to both sides of the
atrocities so that's something that's
being done certainly the more that comes
out about the loosening of these
particular constraints can turn the
tides from allies even further to to
hear the United States pushing back um
on the particular lack of precision I
think is quite a telling step um yeah I
share the the sentiment I wish that
something could be done in a much more
acute way because people are suffering
people are dying as we speak um so it
does feel somewhere like nothing is
being done but I assure you that's
that's not the case I I want to just
focus you for a moment back on AI
artificial intelligence the system that
we are discussing a and and your concern
that you've raised about automation bias
as part of the functionality of this
system and what can potentially go wrong
with it what do you mean by
that yeah I think certainly from the
reporting I was quite concerned the the
red flags of automation bias uh were
raised by reading that essentially what
automation bias is is uh Ai and and
machine learning develops uh particular
targets or makes decisions in a much
faster way than humans can and they do
this based on algorithms and computer
science and that has a tendency because
of the speed at which it happens um for
humans to start believing what the
machine generates is the right direction
the way to go so the Trust In what the
the system generates um is to be trusted
so we have to uh allow that to continue
so de facto even if a human is making
decisions on whether to fire um a bomb
based on algorithmically selected
targets or not de
facto and we're seeing also with this
reporting that um the the pace at which
this is happening doesn't allow for
really very much meaningful human
control and review of What kinds of
Civilian casualties are happening based
on the target selection because it's
just happening at such a rapid pace
Rob G pinfall one of the fascinating
things that struck me in the reporting
was that in the past one of the problems
Israel had was that it ran out of
targets quite quickly because senior
commanders would go immediately
underground into the tunnel system and
they wouldn't be able to find them now
they've got this system which is
generating these huge numbers of targets
among much lower value Hamas kind of
foot solders and enabling them to go in
and hit them at home and their families
and bomb and use heavy artillery in big
uh populated apartment buildings killing
everybody in the vicinity uh it sort of
explains doesn't it why Israel hasn't
been able to claim the death of many
Hamas senior figures but has claimed the
deaths of thousands of Hamas Fighters
and why this technology isn't going to
help them in the end reach the goal of
eliminating Hamas it's not going to help
them get commanders is it
well this is the issue here many of the
commanders have already gone to Grand uh
many of them will probably be in the uh
so-called Gaza Metro hamas's tunnel
Network under the territory uh but I
think you know your question here about
Israel going after hamas's commanders it
also reveals some of the operational and
intelligence failures uh that have
guided Israeli policy to this point uh
obviously um Israel has gone into the
Gaza Strip it's gone primarily into
Northern Gaza it's focused its offensive
on Marza City and you know it could
claim uh victories there in terms of the
casualties the Israeli casualties being
relatively low compared to what was
expected uh the number of Hamas cases it
claims and obviously you know you take
this with a pinch of Sal it claims to
have killed between five to 6,000 uh
Hamas Fighters but at the same time um
Israeli officials were telling us time
and time again that hamas's entire
command and control network is
concentrated in the Gaza City area
there's no need for them to expand the
war to Sou Southern Gaza uh and now the
Seas fires ended Israel is looking to do
exactly that to expand its War to
Southern Gaza is saying that actually
either these key commanders weren't
there at the start they weren't in
Northern Gaza or they were able to
relocate to uh to Southern Gaza so
Israel has made a um even though it's
short term this looks like a operation
or strategic victory for Israel it may
actually um beely greater intelligence
or operational failures which will mean
it now has to expand its War to the
southern Gaza Strip and the issue here
as as [__] mentioned is that it has um
pressured 1.1 million gazans to leave
Northern Gaza and move to Southern Gaza
it's also under increasing pressure from
the Biden Administration the US is
saying um we will not let you um have
such a high civilian death toll if you
do expand your War Gaza you know our
support is finite our support is
dependent on you preserving civilians
and allowing uh fuel for example and
other resources to access the Gaza Strip
so Israel now finds itself in a
strategic dilemma it feels it has to
expand the war to Southern Gaza but at
the same time its ability to do so is
limited uh by uh it's the the closing
window of political support from the
Biden Administration and that window is
only going to close further if um
civilian cases escalate which at the
moment because of Israel's previous
policy of deporting all of those
civilians to Southern Gaza that looks
sadly inevitable and of course it it
won't help that particular argument will
it Jessica dorsy the fact that this
system and what we now know about it uh
raises serious questions about what
Israel and the Israeli Army frequently
say and Israeli politicians too is the
reason for high civilian death toll
which is that Hamas and other armed
groups embed themselves within the
civilian population what we now know is
that targets are being generated to hit
minor level foot soldiers where they
live in their homes which by definition
are in amongst civilians in densely
packed civilian areas so there's no way
to hit them without hitting civilians
that really undermines the argument
doesn't
it absolutely and I think that that is
sort of the the key or the Crux here of
the argument regarding proportionality
and also the distinction discussion we
had earlier about the kind of excessive
civilian harm that we're seeing in
relation to the direct military
Advantage expected if you're going after
low guys um that is not in any way in
line with International legal uh
obligations and you do Israel has an
obligation to protect civilians um and
and follow the laws of war and I think
with the AI system the way that it's
generating these targets at such a fast
pace I think obviously it's acutely
problematic in Gaza right now but other
countries are watching and learning the
way that this is being rolled out there
will be actors who will tune in well
this is how AI ought to be um that is
being used perhaps they're getting away
with certain things I think that that's
a real danger that we haven't touched
upon
indeed I wanted to ask I wanted to put
that very point to Marin Rapaport this
has got to be a fascinating experience
for other militaries bent on this sort
of of War fighting to learn from it's
not just a targeting Factory that
they're looking at but they're looking
at a sort of livefire realtime
experiment in the evolving use of
artificial intelligence in this war on
Gaza um as for you know for
international uh implication I'm I'm not
uh really in a position to uh to comment
to comment too much I do have to to
comment that uh Israel claims that it
did hit some high ranking Hamas
leaders uh heads of of brigades uh Hamas
is not that big but again they did hit
some uh high level Hamas militant
commanders so and and yes and of course
it has to be mentioned that you know
Israel went to this operation after this
terrible Massacre on the 7th of October
where um hundreds of civilians were
massacred and and brought into uh
hostages civilian hostages were taken to
Gaza and this yes although the army of
course does not uh uh does not admit it
but the Vengeance uh uh uh motive is
very much there uh nobody will admit it
but it's uh it's certainly
behind uh the the the the
intensity not Al maybe even the
brutality of these early attacks but
this as was said by my colleagues before
this does not permit is Israel to ignore
international law and the the need to
protect civilian life not not only for
moral reasons only for its own sake
because if Israel does not respect these
laws it will only create more hatred in
the region it will create gener
generations of Palestinian who will want
also to revenge and we will uh go into
an endless circle of violence we will
not end violence we will create more
violence Rob guys pinfold wrap this up
for us in terms of as we were discussing
there the future of AI in Warfare sure
you've got a machine now which is
generating uh targets but it's still a
human being who decides to pull the
trigger and if as Marin's reporting
suggested some Israeli commanders are
perhaps more trigger happy uh than
others well you've certainly got the
potential for an extremely potent War
fighting weapon in this war and many to
come yeah um it's very clear that you
know what's going on here is kind of a
petri disc for future conflicts we are
seeing an increased move to AI even
before the 7th of October you know
people were talking about Israel's U
Military Intelligence capabilities for
example its use of AI like stucks net uh
to [__] Iran Iran's nuclear program
as another example uh but even on the
guard a border you know one I think this
will figure in a commission of inquiry
by the way one of the problems that U
enabled Hamas to kill so many people on
October 7th and to breach Israel's
Border in so many places and to take and
hold territory was because Israel relied
on an automated Network it used sensors
it used drones for example it used
cameras there was a surprisingly um
scant and and small human presence in
terms of Israeli soldiers on the border
simply because the Israeli Defense Force
forces felt that it could manage Gaza
from afar that was proven horrifically
wrong on October the 7th in terms of not
just the massacre of Israelis and and
the shock to Israel but also of course
Israel's subsequent military campaign in
the Gaza Strip but I do want to know
make it clear that Israel um
Israel signicant yeah Israel doesn't
want to call significant civilian
casualties that's not out of a
humanitarian uh or or International
legal perspective it's because knows the
more civilian casualties that are
generated and caused the more pressure
there will be on Israel to stop its
operation okay we're going to have to
leave it there and thanks to all my
guests Maron rapperport Rob gist pinfold
and Jessica dorsy and thanks to you too
for watching you can see the program
again anytime by visiting our website Al
ja.com and for further discussion go to
our Facebook page that's
facebook.com AJ insid
story and you can also join the
conversation on X our handle is at AJ
insid story for me Jonah Hall and the
entire team here in Doha goodbye for
now